.TH "LTTNG-UST-DL" "3" "December 19, 2013" "" ""

.SH "NAME"
lttng-ust-dl \(em LTTng UST 2.x Dynamic Linker Tracing

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
Launch your application with:
.TP
\fBLD_PRELOAD=liblttng-ust-dl.so\fP appname
.PP
This LD_PRELOAD library causes all calls to dlopen and dlclose in the
application to be traced with LTTng. In addition to loading this
library, enabling this tracing requires the following two events to be
enabled: "ust_baddr:push" and "ust_baddr:pop".

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The events have the following detailed definitions:
.PP
.IP "ust_baddr:push"
This event is used to trace dlopen calls. The base address (where the
dynamic linker has placed the shared object) is recorded in the "baddr"
field. The path to the shared object gets recorded in the "sopath" field
(as string). The file size of the loaded object (in bytes) is recorded
to the "size" field and its time of last modification (in seconds since
Epoch) is recorded in the "mtime" field.
.IP "ust_baddr:pop"
This event is used to trace dlclose calls. The base address of the shared
object that got closed is recorded in the "baddr" field.
.PP

.SH "SEE ALSO"
lttng-ust(3), dlopen(3), lttng(1)

.SH "BUGS"
If you encounter any issues or usability problem, please report it on
our mailing list <lttng-dev@lists.lttng.org> to help improve this
project.

.SH "CREDITS"
liblttng-ust is distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License
version 2.1. The headers are distributed under the MIT license.

See http://lttng.org for more information on the LTTng project.

Mailing list for support and development: <lttng-dev@lists.lttng.org>.

You can find us on IRC server irc.oftc.net (OFTC) in #lttng.

.SH "AUTHORS"
liblttng-ust was originally written by Mathieu Desnoyers, with additional
contributions from various other people. It is currently maintained by
Mathieu Desnoyers <mathieu.desnoyers@efficios.com>.
